what I wanted to tell you about was I'm
going to start with a little story so I
grew up in this neighborhood when I was
15 years old I went from being what I
think was a strapping young athlete over
four months slowly wasting away until I
was basically a famine victim with an
unquenchable thirst I had basically
digested away my body and this all came
to a head when I was on a backpacking
trip my first one ever actually on old
rag mountain in West Virginia and was
putting my face into puddles of water
and drinking like a dog that night I was
taken into the emergency room and
diagnosed as a type 1 diabetic in
full-blown ketoacidosis and I recovered
thanks to the miracles of modern
medicine insulin and other things and
gained all my weight back and more and
something festered inside me after this
happened what I thought about was what
caused the diabetes you see diabetes is
an autoimmune disease where your body
fights itself and at the time people
thought that somehow maybe exposure to a
pathogen had triggered my immune system
to fight the pathogen and then kill the
cells that make insulin and this is what
I thought for a long period of time and
that's in fact what medicine and people
have focused on quite a bit the microbes
that do bad things and that's where I
need my my assistant here now you may
recognize her so I went yesterday I
apologize I skipped a few of the talks
and I went over to the National Academy
of Sciences Building and they sell toys
giant microbes and here we go so you you
have caught flesh-eating disease if you
caught that one I got to get back out my
baseball bill here
so so unfortunately or not surprisingly
most of the microbes they sell at the
National Academy building are pathogens
everybody focuses on the things that
kill us and that's what I was focusing
on and it turns out that we are covered
in a cloud of microbes and those
microbes actually do us good much of the
time rather than killing us and so we've
known about this for some period of time
people have used microscopes to look at
the microbes that cover us I know you're
not paying attention to me but the the
microbes that cover us and if you look
at them in the microscope you can see
that we actually have 10 times as many
cells of microbes on us as we have human
cells there's more mass in the microbes
than the mass of our brain we are
literally a teeming ecosystem of
microorganisms and unfortunately if you
want to learn about the microorganisms
just looking at them in a microscope is
not sufficient and so we just heard
about the DNA sequencing it turns out
that one of the best ways to look at
microbes and to understand them is to
look at their DNA and that's what I've
been doing for 20 years using DNA
sequencing collecting samples from
various places including the human body
reading the DNA sequence and then using
that DNA sequencing to tell us about the
microbes that are in a particular place
and what's amazing when you use this
technology for example looking at humans
we're not just covered in a sea of
microbes there are thousands upon
thousands of different kinds of microbes
on us we have millions of genes of
microbes in our human microbiome
covering us and so this microbial
diversity differs between people and
what people have been thinking about in
the last ten maybe fifteen years is
maybe these microbes this microbial
cloud in and on us and the variation
between us may be responsible for some
of the health and illness differences
between us and that comes back to the
diabetes story I was telling you it
turns out that people now think that
one of the triggers for type 1 diabetes
is not fighting a pathogen but is in
fact trying to miss communicating with
the microbes that live in and on you and
somehow maybe the microbial community
that's in and on me got off and then
this triggered some sort of immune
response and led to me killing the cells
that make insulin in my body and so what
I want to tell you about for a few
minutes is what people have learned
using DNA sequencing techniques in
particular to study the microbe the
microbial cloud that lives in and on us
and I want to tell you a story about a
personal project my first personal
experience was studying the microbes on
the human body actually came from a talk
that I gave right around the corner from
here at Georgetown I gave a talk and a
family friend who happened to be the
Dean of Georgetown Medical School was at
the talk and came up to me afterwards
saying they were doing a study of ileal
transplants in people and they wanted to
look at the microbes after the
transplants and so I started a
collaboration with this person Michael's
a sloth and Thomas Fishbein to look at
the microbes that colonize these Ilia
after they were transplanted into a
recipient and I can tell you all the
details about the microbial study that
we did there but the reason I want to
tell you this story is something really
striking that they did at the beginning
of this project they take the donor
ileum which is filled with microbes from
a donor and they have a recipient who
might have a problem with their
microbial community say Crohn's disease
and they sterilized the donor ileum
cleaned out all the microbes and then
put it in the recipient they did this
because this was common practice in
medicine even though it was obvious that
this was not a good idea and fortunately
in the course of this project the
transplant surgeons and the other people
decided forget common practice we have
to switch so they actually switch to
leaving some of the microbial community
in the ileum that ileum inside these
people they leave the microbes with the
donor and theoretically that might help
the people who are receiving this ileal
transplant and so people this is us
study that I did now in the last few
years there's been a great expansion in
using DNA technology to study the
microbes in and on people there's
something called the human microbiome
project that's going on in the United
States and metahit going on in Europe
and a lot of other projects and when
people have done a variety of studies
they have learned things such as when a
baby is born during vaginal delivery you
get colonized by the microbes from your
mother there are risk factors associated
with cesarean sections some of those
risk factors may be due to miss
colonization when you carve a baby out
of its mother rather than being
delivered through the birth canal and a
variety of other studies have shown that
the microbial community that lives in
and on us helps in development of the
immune system helps in fighting off
pathogens helps in our metabolism and
determining our metabolic rate probably
determines our odor and may even shape
our behavior in a variety of ways and so
these studies have documented or
suggested at a variety of important
functions for the microbial community
this cloud the non pathogens that live
in and on us and one area that I think
is very interesting which many of you
may have now that we've thrown microbes
into the crowd something that I would
call germophobia so people are really
into cleanliness right we have
antibiotics in our kitchen counters
people are washing every part of them
all of the time we pump antibiotics into
our food into our communities we take
antibiotics excessively and killing
pathogens is a good thing if you're sick
but we should understand that when we
pump chemicals and antibiotics into our
world that we're also killing the cloud
of microbes that live in and on us an
excessive use of antibiotics in
particular and children have been shown
to be associated with again risk factors
for obesity for autoimmune diseases for
a variety of problems that are probably
due to disruption of the microbial
community so the microbial community can
go wrong whether we want it to or not or
we can kill it with antibiotics but what
can we do to restore it so I'm sure
where many people here have heard about
probiotics probiotics are one thing that
you can try and do to restore the
microbial community that is in and on
you and they definitely have been shown
to be effective in some cases there's a
project going on at UC Davis where
people are using probiotics to try and
treat prevent necrotizing enterocolitis
and premature infants premature infants
have real problems with their microbial
community and it may be the probiotics
can help prevent the development of this
horrible necrotizing enterocolitis in
these premature infants but probiotics
are sort of a very very simple solution
most of that the pills that you can take
or the yogurts that you can eat have one
or two species in them maybe five
species in them and the human community
is thousands upon thousands of species
so what can we do to restore our
microbial community when we have
thousands and thousands of species on us
well one thing that animals seem to do
is they eat eat poo coprophagia and it
turns out that many veterinarians old
school veterinarians in particular have
been doing something called pootie not
booty but pootie to treat colic and
other sort of ailments in horses and
cows and things like that where you make
tea from the poo from a healthy
individual animal and you feed it to a
sick animal although unless you have a
fistulae today ow with a big hole in its
side and you can put your hand into its
rumen it's hard to imagine that the
delivery of microbes directly into the
mouth and through the entire sort of top
of the digestive tract is the best
delivery system so you may have heard in
people they are now doing fecal
transplants where rather than delivering
a couple of probiotic microbes through
the mouth they are delivering a
community of probiotics a community of
microbes from a healthy donor through
the other end and this has turned out to
be very effective in fighting certain
intransigent infectious diseases like
Clostridium difficile infections that
can stay with people for a year
years and years transplants of the feces
of the microbes from the seat feces from
a healthy donor has actually been shown
to cure systemic see diff infections in
some people now what these transplants
these fecal transplants or the pootie
suggests to me and many other people
have come up with this same idea is that
the microbial community in and on us
it's an organ we should view it as a
functioning organ part of ourselves we
should treat it carefully and with
respect and we do not want to mess with
it say by c-sections or by antibiotics
or excessive cleanliness without some
real good justification and what the DNA
sequencing technologies are allowing
people to do now is do detailed studies
of say a hundred patients who have
Crohn's disease and a hundred people who
don't have Crohn's disease or a hundred
people who took antibiotics when they
were little and a hundred people who did
not take antibiotics and we can now
start to compare the community of
microbes and their genes and see if
there are differences and eventually we
may be able to understand if they're not
just correlative differences but
causative studies in model systems like
mouse and other animals are also helping
do this but we are people are now using
these technologies because they've
gotten very cheap to study the microbes
in and on a variety of people so in
wrapping up what I want to tell you
about is that I didn't tell you a part
of the story of coming down with
diabetes turns out that my father was an
MD actually studied hormones I told him
many times that I was tired thirsty not
feeling very good and he shrugged it off
I think he either thought I was just you
know complaining a lot or it was the
typical MD you know nothing can be wrong
with my children we even went to the
International Society of endocrinology
meeting as a family in Quebec and I was
getting up every five minutes to pee
and drinking everybody's water at the
table and I think they all thought I was
a druggie
but the reason I'm telling you this is
that the medical community my father as
an example sometimes doesn't see what's
right in front of their eyes the
microbial cloud it is right in front of
us we can't see it most of the time it's
invisible they're microbes they're tiny
but we can see them through their DNA we
can see them through the effects that
they have on people and what we need now
is to start thinking about this
microbial community in the context of
everything in human medicine it doesn't
mean that it affects every part of us
but it might what we need is a full
field guide to the microbes that live in
and on people so that we can understand
what they're doing to our lives we are
them they are us thank you